# Capstone-First-Draft
Performed exploratory data analysis (EDA) to develop an initial report for the capstone project.

Links to [prompt](https://github.com/MeghanHan/Capstone-First-Draft/blob/main/Capstone_First_Draft.ipynb), and [images](https://github.com/MeghanHan/Capstone-First-Draft/tree/main/image)

### Data
The dataset for the capstone project is two `.csv` files generated by Wake County’s Computer Assisted Mass Appraisal (CAMA) system that can be found on its website (https://www.wake.gov/departments-government/tax-administration/data-files-statistics-and-reports/real-estate-property-data-files).
The file names and descriptions of the data are as follows:

- sales.csv: Qualified sales in Wake County from October 2nd, 2023, to September 22nd, 2025, and information on zoning, location and some property characteristics.
- properties.csv: An exhaustive list of characteristics of all the properties in Wake County. Code Description.pdf provides the meaning behind the coded features' values.

### Objective
Since the global pandemic Covid broke in 2020, the state of North Carolina has seen a surge of population from migration both nationally and internationally. Within the US, tens of thousands of people moved from New York, Pennsylvania and California to North Carolina every year attracted by its high-quality public education, newer infrastructure, great parks, good public safety, lower income and property tax rate and so on, bidding the housing prices up significantly. Wake county sits in the heart of the research triangle. It has seen its personal property tax base increase from 6.0 billion to 11.6 billion from 2020 to 2025, almost doubled.

The objective of this analysis is to predict single family housing prices in Wake County, North Carolina based on property location and characteristics. It aims to find what factors predict single family housing prices in Wake County, and to provide insights into the hot North Carolina real estate market for relocating families.

### Preliminary Findings
- The time series trend analysis shows that real estate prices in Wake County have fluctuated around the mean from October 2023 to October 2025, with a visible downtrend in the second half of 2025.
- The baseline linear regression model using all quantitative features indicates that sale price is positively associated with total heated area at sale, assessed grade difference (reflecting the property’s overall condition relative to comparable properties), parcel deeded acreage at sale, and year of addition. In contrast, sale price is negatively associated with story height and year built, while the number of rooms has minimal impact. The four most influential predictors are total heated area at sale, assessed grade difference, story height, and parcel deeded acreage at sale.
- After building a pipeline to capture nonlinearity and selecting four key features, the mean squared error improved compared to the baseline model. Using second-degree polynomial features and a sequential feature selection process, the selected predictors were: assessed grade difference; total heated area at sale squared; the interaction between assessed grade difference and total heated area at sale; and the interaction between year built and story height.
